Initial draft of a release process for the cellxgene-schema PyPI package (#168)
chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation: docs/release_process.md

1. Decide on whether the changes going into the next release warrant a patch, minor, or major version bump using [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) and determine the version number based on the current latest version (i.e. if the current version is 2.0.3 and you'd like to do a minor version bump, then the next version will be 2.1.0).

1. Create a release branch from latest main (e.g. `git checkout -b release-version-x.y.z`).

1. In `setup.py` change the version number to be the version number determined in step 1.

1. Update the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/cellxgene_schema_cli/CHANGELOG.md) with the latest changes going into the new release. 

1. Commit the changes, push the new branch to origin, and open a PR to be reviewed. Do not merge in the PR yet.

1. Release the new version to Test PyPI. This can be done by running `make test-release`. Test the release by installing `cellxgene-schema` using pip `pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ cellxgene-schema` in a fresh virtual environment.

> 1. If you find errors with the release candidate, fix them in `main`, delete the current release branch, and start over from step 1 with the next version number. Please also update the CHANGELOG with a note that the version number has been burned. This is necessary because once a version goes out on Test PyPI (or PyPI), that version number cannot be used again (i.e. there are no updates supported). For example, if you were trying to release a minor bump, say 2.1.0, and you found an error, then the next version will be 2.2.0 and 2.1.0 will be a "burn".

Reviewer: To simplify the process, could this be done in the current working branch with an extra commit? 

Unless, is there a strong reason to start the process all over again?

Author: OK this is a bit moot now since with the release candidate, there is no longer any need to recreate a new branch. 

I would recommend that fixes typically be done in a separate branch anyways just so that the fix can actually go into `main` and not be confused with any changes that are related to version bumping. Small, atomic PRs are usually a best practice.

# cellxgene-schema Release Process

_This document defines the release process of the pip installable `cellxgene-schema` tool to PyPI._

The goal of the release process is to publish an installable package to PyPi, with a matching tagged release on github.

## Overview

The release process should result in the following side effects:

* Version number bump, using semantic versioning
* Tagged Github release
* Publication to PyPi

Note all release tags pushed to GitHub MUST follow semantic versioning.

## How to release the next version of `cellxgene-schema`

Steps must be run from the project directory and in a virtual env with all the dependencies defined in `requirements.txt` installed.

1. Decide on whether the changes going into the next release warrant a patch, minor, or major version bump using [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) and determine the version number based on the current latest version (i.e. if the current version is 2.0.4 and you'd like to do a minor version bump, then the next version will be 2.1.0).

1. Create a release branch from the `main` branch of the `single-cell-curation` repo (e.g. `git checkout -b release-version-x.y.z`).

> 1. Run `make create-release-candidate PART={major | minor | patch}`, where you set `PART` to be one of `major` or `minor` or `patch` based on Step 1. This step will automatically bump the version of the package to the appropriate next version in `setup.py` and commit the change to the branch. Note that this will create a release candidate version, so if the current version is 2.0.4 and you want to do a minor release, then the version will be 2.1.0rc0. The `rc` suffix will be removed in a later step.

Reviewer: This make command is not in the Makefile of this repo

> 1. Run `make create-release-candidate PART={major | minor | patch}`, where you set `PART` to be one of `major` or `minor` or `patch` based on Step 1. This step will automatically bump the version of the package to the appropriate next version in `setup.py` and commit the change to the branch. Note that this will create a release candidate version, so if the current version is 2.0.4 and you want to do a minor release, then the version will be 2.1.0rc0. The `rc` suffix will be removed in a later step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Run `make create-release-candidate PART={major | minor | patch}`, where you set `PART` to be one of `major` or `minor` or `patch` based on Step 1. This step will automatically bump the version of the package to the appropriate next version in `setup.py` and commit the change to the branch. Note that this will create a release candidate version, so if the current version is 2.0.4 and you want to do a minor release, then the version will be `2.1.4-rc.0`. The `rc` suffix will be removed in a later step.
```

> 1. Run `make create-release-candidate PART={major | minor | patch}`, where you set `PART` to be one of `major` or `minor` or `patch` based on Step 1. This step will automatically bump the version of the package to the appropriate next version in `setup.py` and commit the change to the branch. Note that this will create a release candidate version, so if the current version is 2.0.4 and you want to do a minor release, then the version will be 2.1.0rc0. The `rc` suffix will be removed in a later step.

Author: Done! I updated the sibling PR to add the checkout step and delete the checkout step from the instructions here.

1. Update the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/cellxgene_schema_cli/CHANGELOG.md) with the latest changes going into the new release. 

1. Commit the changes, push the new branch to origin, and open a PR to be reviewed. Do not merge in the PR yet.

> 1. Run `make release-candidate-to-test-pypi` to release the newly created release candidate to Test PyPI. Test the release by installing `cellxgene-schema` using `pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ cellxgene-schema=={release_candidate_version}` in a fresh virtual environment.

Reviewer: This make command is not in the Makefile of this repo

> 1. If you detect errors in the release, fix them in `main` and then rebase the release branch. Then run `make recreate-release-candidate` to bump up the release candidate version (i.e. 2.1.0rc0 will get bumped up to 2.1.0rc1). Run `make release-candidate-to-test-pypi` again to release this candidate to Test PyPI for testing.

Reviewer: This make command is not in the Makefile of this repo

> 1. If you detect errors in the release, fix them in `main` and then rebase the release branch. Then run `make recreate-release-candidate` to bump up the release candidate version (i.e. 2.1.0rc0 will get bumped up to 2.1.0rc1). Run `make release-candidate-to-test-pypi` again to release this candidate to Test PyPI for testing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If you detect errors in the release, fix them in `main` and then rebase the release branch. Then run `make recreate-release-candidate` to bump up the release candidate version (i.e. 2.1.0-rc.0 will get bumped up to 2.1.0-rc.1). Run `make release-candidate-to-test-pypi` again to release this candidate to Test PyPI for testing.
```

> 1. If everything looks good, release the final candidate to Test PyPI by running `make release-final-to-test-pypi`. This will remove the `rc` tag from the version and upload the distribution to Test PyPI in one go. Test one last time to make sure everything is OK.

Reviewer: This make command is not in the Makefile of this repo
